Introduction
============

Why does one-fifth of the way into the 21st century just feel like it's been one continuous slow ride over the past half a century? Why is it when we think of life 50 years ago, it doesn't really seem that different except for smartphones? Was that all we did?

What happened to our promised future? Fusion energy, automated flying cars, and commercial space travel through the galaxy? We have none of this.

Did any future ever happen? Will it ever happen? Could we already be living in one and just not realize it? Are we at the end of a future, a giant S curve of society where we asymptotically are approaching a steady state?

Is that even a valid way to look at the world around us?

Is there a peaceful revolution of the mind in our lifetimes in store? How can we build this next future? Are some potential futures more valuable than others? How would such a nexus of values be contoured in our collectively imagined worlds of tomorrow?

Is there a blueprint or a guide that can help us with actualizing this future stuff?  Are there methods or processes of creating futures that work better than others? If so, how do we structure efforts around them and continually validate that we are going where we intend to? 

Is having an intended specific goal even possible or is it, at its best, inherently undefinable? If it is inherently undefinable does that mean it's also inherently inactionable or no better than random shots in the dark?

What is technology and what role does it play? Will simply having more wondrous manufactured devices be the future we've been looking for or is there fundamentally more to it? How does what we build affect society and how does society affect what we build? Have previous futures fundamentally changed the nature of being human?

Are reactionary political imaginaries supposedly of past worlds truly regressive in nature or are they actually strong and bold future oriented visions spoken in a different shared common language? Does this implicate that future, whatever it is, has an unstoppable always present velocity and our only mechanism of influence is upon its steering wheel?

This book is my attempt to document my 15 or so years in my analysis of this style of interrogation about future and futurism.

The objective of the text is to make the future exciting again.

I've divided the work into three sections:

Part 1 defines the terms and bootstraps the theories. We go over visions, goals, dreams, futures, hopes, execution, failure, and directions.  A number of helpful rules are established along with how to identify them, think about them, and execute them.

Part 2 contains historical examples showing these patterns of future thought starting from antiquity up to the present. By looking at the history of what was once considered cutting edge technology, such as newspapers, we can see the multi-century long-play of futures past.

Part 3 presents companies and projects I'm currently involved in and how these methods and perspectives can be used to provide meaning and significance to a particular project. It also speculatively proposes what real-world futures will look like based on the long-view analysis presented in the former sections.

The future doesn't come from having new answers, but by the perpetual struggle of asking the right questions at the right time.  If the future *only* comes from changes that *were not* anticipated, the task of futurists is to facilitate the fostering of unanticipated change.  

The hope is to be able to empower people to help forefront ideas and perspectives to constitute a better tomorrow.

Let me close the Introduction with a bit of poetry I wrote about 10 years ago, early on in my thoughts about the matter:

  | Well there may be no rocket cars
  | and perhaps no life on Mars
  | but a billion bytes for half a dime
  | is future enough for me.
  |
  | I haven't got a servant robot
  | or sleep atop the thousandth floor
  | But with the whole world in my pocket
  | How could I ask for more?
  |
  | So when you think the future's bust
  | and it was all just smoke and mirrors
  | I say it's come, and yes it's here,
  | We just all decided to switch gears.

Chris Mckenzie
November 2019
