Part 1
======
The Anatomy of a Future
=======================

1.1 What is Technology?
-----------------------

When faced with the question of defining technology many at first give the answer to a different question: "What are examples of technologies?".  For example, they'll point to modern tools such as computers or automobiles.

When pressed to go further, often a more abstract answer will be presented, such as "something that improves our lives" or "tools that are manufactured".

This class of answers presents a problem: Did techology exist before say, 1800 CE? What about prior to 1000 BCE?

Most then come back with the acknowledgement that spears and weapons are technologies as well. So this would mean technology is generally tools. 

Let's look at words related to technology: technical, and technique. Those two words are much more about process and craft. They are transitive in nature and transitioning in intent. Technical is about a richer understanding and technique is about a richer manipulation. 

So what about the advancement in germ theory that led to the medical world doing the simple task of sterilization? Is that also a technology?  It's a process, it improves lives, it's based on some scientific understanding, there's tools used.  Would that too, the act of cleaning tools, also be a technology? Likely so.

What about the skills to do it? Surely different methods of cleaning have different outcomes and different results.  The shephearding of the tools between the cleaning and use and the mechanisms for doing that, aren't those processes and knowledge also a set technologies?

Do all of these "technologies" as defined appear to follow roughly the same paths of improvements and refinements? 

For instance, when we look back on say, how we chose to act on treating a disease in the past and compare it to how we do it now, isn't that cognitively the same epistemological distinction as looking at say, the tools of diagnostics of the disease or the classifications of the systems for dealing with it?

Wouldn't this implicate that technology is really a kind of system?  Is it an abstraction of thought with many manifestations? What is it not? 

For instance, most would agree the act of building a computer is an act of technology but the act of writing a novel on the building of the computer is not.  But perhaps that's simply because novels have been around for a long time.  What if, instead of this novel, we are talking about Miguel de Cervantes writing the first European novel, Don Quixote, in 1605? 

Would the innovation of being the first novel thus make it a technological act? Is technology then, the space occupied between invention and commodity? Don't worry, you'll be able to answer all these questions in a few paragraphs.

Technology as an abstraction
============================

The biggest insight to help me understand these problems and what technology is comes from an unsuspecting place.  I've long been interested in gift economies.  Some societies instead of bartering goods would apparently give things to others, sometimes at significant sacrafice, without any traditional model of reciprocity.  Often years of effort would go into constructing elaborate gifts, such as raising livestock, and then long dangerous journeys would happen, for no obvious immediate reason, to just give the animals away to someone else in a grand elaborate ceremony with no materials exchanged in return. Then the gift giver would leave.  

In fact, in many instances, there was no separate market economy of exchange. This was the only mechanism of exchange. What is going on here?

Unlike in market economies, which I assume everyone is familiar with, a gift economy has a different definition of property than what we are accustomed to. For instance, in property law of market economies, the term "alienable" means the ability of property to be completely owned and transferred, usually through buying and selling, ie, private property.  

Throughout time there's been debate over what is and is not alienable property. The most obvious example is slavery but even today there's debate over whether human organs such as kidneys can be bought and sold. What about the actions of politicians? What about prostitution? There is a fluid idea of what can and cannot participate in a market economy because there's debate over what can be claimed as alienable private property.

In gift economies, this fundamental assumption of private, alienable property is up for grabs. An original "owner" can define and have use-rights to what is gifted and may eventually request it returned or may have rights to say, the offspring of the livestock for the benefit of some future generation.  The gift here would constitute an investment.

This leads to the insight that property isn't a thing, it's a relationship among people about things.  This is the most important and counterintuitive concept in understanding the nature of technology for the premise of this book.

In gift economies, the human relationship and social arrangement has primacy and the object known as property is a vehicle for it.  The act of the transfer is about the construction of the relationships. Political economy is about a system of social arrangements. Someone is rich because we have collectively consented to that arrangement.  In many revolutions, this consent is revoked and the nature of the relationships change which implicate the nature of the property change - what we choose to call property and the systems of constraints we place around it is both a symptom and consequence of the human relationships surrounding it.

That means that property is a set of conventions practiced with physical objects. In more traditional economies, there can be restrictions of use through copyrights, patents, and trademarks. There are usually legal ramifications for me to buy a copy of something, create additional copies, and then sell them for profit. We call that theft, which is a violation of the agreed upon property law.

Thus the notion of property is fundamentally a relationship. What can and cannot be property and the rights one can do on their property is also a function of relationships. The rights and liberties surrounding the properties are consequences of these. Someone making money through illegal means for instance, doesn't have the same property protections as someone else making the money through legal means.

If property is the object of relationship, technology is the *mechanism of relationships among people and their environment*.  It's a physical or fictional (in the legal sense) device that has a describable mechanical nature. Technology may or may not involve a physical object but *it is not the object itself*. In the same way that property is the relationship, technology is a mechanism of that relationship.

A plant growing leaves with medicinal properties isn't itself a technology, the mechanism of using that plant in a medicinal way, that's the technology.  If this plant is cultivated in a way to make that medicinal more effective, the newer plants are objects of technology in the same way that a private thing is an object of property.  The technology is the exercising (mechanization) of these objects just like the poperty is the relationship.

To illustrate this further, let's use a microscope. Microscopes aren't The technology but an object of the technology of magnitfication and a mechanism of relationships of using magnification. Relationships with who? Relationships with what? Imagine a single person in a lab, looking through the microscope, writing down observations. What is the relationship? 

Even if it's just one person using a microscope, making an observation, there's still a fundamental technology relationship. To understand it, we have to look deeper at what a relationship is. The root word, relate, the parameters of interaction and knowledge, that's the core permutation of science made by the processes of things such as observations.  The microscope is a realtionship that facilitates the creation of new relationships. Tools bridge technologies. They are the connections and lead to technologies which birth further tools.

On another level, the microscope was also an instrumental instrument in understanding diseases and how humans related with  diseases. The microscope is a device for connecting environmental relationship. 

Mistaking the action for the object and the object for the action is an immensely easy thing to do that robs us of deeper throught.
Marx calls this mistaking of the relationship (among people) for the physical object "commodity fetishism", or in our case, our personal relationship among physical objects obscures the true nature of technology. If we fetishize the physical object of the microscope and assume it *is* the technology, it misdirects our intentions away from our goals in using the physical object. That's why science fiction that tells basic stories but substitutes fictional future stuff are considered to be rather low quality. The future is a holistic study.

Some people are still unconvinced of the encompassing definition of technology as something that doesn't use fuel or physics or plug into a wall. I'm going to show how that's an artificial confinement of how we choose to think about technology and not a core requirement of it. 

Think about how technology is used. Before an engineer automates a task, they often have people do a manual, traditional version of the task and then automate the parts that are necessary when it's necessary. Are only the software parts here technology or is the entire approach a form of technology? Can't it be argued that the entirety is a technology and the detail of what is or is not automated is a characteristic of and not the nature of the technology?

When people complain about how a difficult device is a challenge to use, they'll blame the technology, that is to say, the human process with the tool.  The interfacing of the tool, which is a relationship, that's the point of criticism. That is also part of the technology.

Laws, language, arithmetic, these are also technologies. If you've ever read mathematical text without proper training you've probably found it confusing. Mathematics has a technical, or technological way of dealing with words, a specific and rigid philosophy of meaning, a contoured geometry of specificity. It can't be dealt with without such stringency.

When these things are viewed as the process and systems of skills, crafts, art and techniques it allows us to see tekne(the root word which means those things: arts, crafts, techniques)-logy in the way we organize our institutions, govern our relationships, and also, of course, in the physical objects of our use.  But more importantly, our use of it is part of the technology and a separate and distinct form of technology.

There's three groups of technology: people (ex: skills, crafts, abilities), process (ex: relationships, responsibilities, institutions), and physical objects (ex: computers, tools, airplanes). These can be orchestrated towards a goal if they are the right kinds of people, processes, and physical objects capable of collectively reaching that end together. This is called the PPT model of technology.

"People" refers their craft and method. "Process" refers to the rules governing their relationship with others and physical objects are the tools of execution.

Peter Kropotkin, a 19th century Russian anarchist, wrote (in English) in his 1899 work Memoirs of a Revolutionary: 

  I began to appreciate the difference between acting on the principle of command and discipline and acting on the principle of common understanding. The former works admirably in a military parade, but it is worth nothing where real life is concerned, and the aim can be achieved only through the **severe effort of many converging wills**.

The transmission and aggregation of shared dreams is the foundation of future-thought and is only possible, and still much effort, if all the available parts coalesce.

In this context, culture can be seen as an adaptive machine, where the interplay of relationships constituting the mechanics of the machine, can be tooled towards certain classes of outcomes.  Not all cultural configurations have the same distance of effort to the same outcomes. The premissible dynamics of the framing of our relationships are the primary mechanism in the achievability of potential realities.

The Frankfurt philosopher Jürgen Habermas spoke of this convergence in the Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere, in 1962 (originally in German), when discussing the French Revolution of 1789:

  The bourgeois public sphere may be conceived above all as the sphere of private people come together as a public; they soon claimed the public sphere regulated from above against the public authorities themselves, to engage them in a debate over the general rules governing relations in the basically privatized but publicly relevant sphere of commodity exchange and social labor.
 
The process, tools, and people, as new mechanics of relationships, in the interest of an invented notion of a public sphere, was the key technology which redirected the goals of society and eventually brought down the French Monarchy.

When someone in the world of business says "it's a people problem" or "people problems can't be fixed with technology" what they mean is that the methods and crafts do not necessarily depend on physical objects.  The same paintbrush in different hands can yield dramatically different results.  Trying to orient the results by redesigning the paintbrush is far less effective then just finding the right person to hand the brush to.

This is the interplay of technology.  A complete technology execution has all 3 of these and gets to the value of being.

For example, the Catholic Church has people, processes, and physical objects that are orchestrated together and as a result is a continuous technology dating, as an institution, at least 1500 years. Because they are all tightly and intimately connected, the institution of the church tries to exist as its own thing, disconnected from reality except through certain levers and mechanisms, in the same way that a machine is defined by the finite number of operations that can be done upon it.
