1.4 The necessity of illusion
---------------------------

Illusions are commitments to perception not constrained by the required integrities of reality. Illusions are our closest approximations to experiencable ideas.

They have a specific logic and language and are a rich platform of communicating thought. Like the shadows on Plato's cave or Margrittes Pipe that isn't, their power rests in that they exist on the fundamental unit of human thought, the idea.

There is no other cognitive reality beyond belief. We have ornamentation and product packaging to try to claim otherwise but thoughts, beliefs, ideas, and knowledge are merely idiomatic separations of process and not different actual stuff.

Belief in something working, or that it can be done or that it's at hand. Belief in achievability or unachievability. Belief in why a particular investment of time is justified, belief in that it's an investment and that it's a justifiable reason.

This is the stories we are told, tell our selves, and tell others.  Stories at their purest form are orchestrations of illusions of reality and are theaters for the minds eye. The best ones come indistinguishale from reality. They have a crisp transmission of thought, a communicated value of being, the necessary illusion before a future realized.

The Palm Pilot: Empowered Illusions 
====================================

A classic story often repeated is the Jeff Hawkins garage-made block of wood representing a future device he called the Palm Pilot.

This tale is often told as follows: Here's Jeff, Ed, and Donna, the fable goes, with nothing but an idea who go to repeated investor meetings and leave with failure. Then Jeff has an idea! He pretotypes a block of wood mocking it up to be the device he seeks to create. It looks and feels much like the Palm 1000. He goes to his next investor meeting, tosses it on the table to curious eyes who pick it up, feel it in their hands, play with it and imagines.  For the furst time these rich curmudgeons understand the concept of a handheld computer, they toss their money into his project and the rest is history.

It's an illusion of an illusion. A mostly fictionalized historical narrative that brings together a number of real events imagined as a single narrative. Here's the real history:

Palm was a software company that started in 1992, funded by Tandy to write software on a failed PDA called the Zoomer that they were releasing with Casio. The principle was Jeff Hawkins who had worked on a previous tablet computer for GRiD (running MS-DOS, called the GRidPad,released in 1989) a subsidiary of Tandy.  They continued on as a software-for-handhelds company selling things like Graffiti for the Apple Newton, exiting in 1995 in a sale to US Robotics without ever releasing their own device.  Their first device, under ownership of US Robotics was the Palm 1000 in March of 1996.  There were no failed investor meetings, no tossing of a block of wood on a table, none of that. 

The actual history here and the fictional narrative are both important. We can see how the models of future-stuff work with the process of illusion.  The Palm 1000 and 5000 were part of project "Touchdown", which came out of frustration between Palm and Casio over the design of the Zoomer (meant to rhyme with Consumer). (http://kevinboudreau.com/CASE_Palm_Licensing.pdf). A Casio executive stated about the design: "Everything and the kitchen sink had to be in the product" effectively stating that they wanted to take existing paradigms and stuff it into a smaller box.

The Palm cadre were fairly convinced that this was wrong and nobody was doing PDA right, which was why, their theory goes, they continually failed. Going back to 1.2, we stated "Success isn't a commitment existing within the confinement of a reality as much as it is a commitment to creating a new one." and "The process of getting there is about making sure our dreams aren't lost in transmission." Hawkins exemplified this in project Touchdown.

Instead of being a smaller computer, Touchdown was to be a computer companion. Palm turned down deals with a number of companies who wanted to compromise the design. As the project became more expensive, their cash problems grew. A takeover by US Robotics, who had connection to nationwide retailers, was agreed upon for $44 million in stock, finalizing in Sept 1995 on the condition that Hawkins and Dubinsky (Palms CEO) could continue on Touchdown.

What about the famous block of wood? Was it made after and just mythically backdated? No. It existed. Here Hawkins spoke of the famous block of wood in an Apr 13 1998 interview on NPR:

"It's true, I went home in my garage. And I have a bunch of materials I work with -- foam boarding, wood and so on, and tape. And I knocked out a model of a Palm Pilot with a stylus in a cradle, and I still have it and it looks remarkably similar to the current product. And that took about 18 months from that block of wood 'til we actually shipped the first Pilot."

So here's a brief run-down of Palm computers and other pen-computing related technologies
over the 1992-1996 period:

======= ========= =========================================================================
Date    Company   Action
======= ========= =========================================================================
01-1992 Palm      Funded by GRiD's parent Tandy, launches to write software for the Zoomer.
07-1992 Microsoft Releases Windows for Pen Computing, announces a tablet named WinPad.
12-1992 Casio     Original deadline for Zoomer flies by, no device yet.
08-1993 Apple     Releases Newton MessagePad (50,000 sold), flops.
10-1993 Casio     Zoomer finally ships, 10 months late, flops.
12-1993 Dauphin   Releases "Desktop Replacement" (DTR-1 - under 30,000 sold), flops.
08-1994 IBM       Releases Simon (50,000 sold), flops.
09-1994 Palm      Hawkins builds his block-of-wood Pilot
10-1994 Microsoft Cancels their WinPad tablet project, not releasing anything
12-1994 Microsoft Announces project Pegasus, another palmtop attempt
12-1994 Sony      Releases MagicLink, flops
01-1995 Dauphin   Files for bankruptcy
03-1995 Motorola  Releases Envoy, flops
09-1995 Palm      Bought by USRobotics
04-1996 Palm      Releases Pilot 1000/5000, success!
11-1996 Microsoft Releases Windows CE 1.0, flops
======= ========= =========================================================================

There's a timeline littered with failures from all the big players yet Hawkins sprints out of the pack with a success, what was it about Touchdown that was different? Hawkins stated in the NPR interview, "It had to be better than paper, and previous products were thought of as computers. And we realized our competition was the paper day planner."

Instead of trying to "shoehorn Windows into a hand-held computer" (Hawkins), he tried something different, an audacious crispness of vision.  For instance, Grafitti, the input system, "Everyone in the industry thought we were crazy [to have users adapt to the product]" was about going beyond the confinement of reality.  The illusion of the block of wood "designed to fit in a shirt pocket" was the transmission of the dream the built the success.

There's always a sliding scale between story and reality when reaching for a goal; the distance between them is the "reach distance" or the gulf of illusion. The distance between the beginning and the end is the "goal distance". One of the main goals in developing new products is to narrow the reach distance. This can be done in one of two ways:

- Have more reality to require less illusion 

- Decrease the reach distance

This model, although easy to understand, needs some nuance. Goals aren't material, they are idealized. They should be impractical and unattainable because they work as a collection of principles that constitute a value of being.  The manifestations should be approximations of the thought stuff.  If they are exact hits, then it isn't future enough.

Microsoft brilliantly executed this when they were fighting off a very innovative Pen Computing company, GO, in 1991. Go had released a fairly revolutionary PenPoint OS. [#]_  6 weeks after it was demoed, Microsoft had a "product" called Pen Windows, that appeared to do the same things.  But it was an illusion.

For instance, in PenPoint, a user could fully embed documents within documents in a cross-contextual navigable way allowing the user to swim around the system via pen creating new contextual links that permit them to inter-connect thought. They had spaces for bookmarks where the pen could deep link any part of any document which would move with the document, as it was being edited. Simply extraordinary.

This existential threat of what was essentially the Xerox Parc boys giving it another go, this time through pen computing, shook Microsoft. GO had elegantly and seemlessly achieved what Microsoft had been promissing and dreaming of for years. That was a problem. They couldn't deliver or compete against GO in any reasonable amount of time but they could pull dirty tricks and lie. 

And that's exactly what they did.

Their illusion of equivalency provided by Microsoft is well documented in "BARBARIANS LED BY BILL GATES" by Jennifer Edstrom and Marlin Eller:

  Eller's group kluged up this demo for videotape that showed how
  edit in place would work. He launched Excel with a chart in it. Then
  he launched Word with the chart cut from the Excel program. The
  smaller Excel window was hiding in the background, and the Word
  window was bigger so the audience couldn't see Excel. Eller drew a
  gesture on the chart sitting in Word, which called Excel to the top.
  As long as Excel was in the right place, it came right up on top of
  where Word was, and it didn't look like anything had moved. It
  looked like Word had just popped up the Excel menus right into the
  middle of the Word documents so it could be edited. Eller made the
  changes in Excel and closed it. He hooked up a software instruction
  that told Excel to move to the background and disappear behind
  Word. Then it looked like he was working again in Word with the
  proper Excel document embedded in it.

  It looked great on the tape, but it was total bull, pure smoke and
  mirrors, the apotheosis of vaporware. There was no linking or embedding 
  occurring. Eller was simply pulling one application to the
  front of the other one.

  At the company meeting, executive Mike Maples stepped up to
  the podium.

  "Okay, here's this other thing we're working on," Maples said.
  "Here I have my document, and I have my tablet here." He held the
  pen up and waved it.

  "Now I can go into my Word document here, and I can write."
  While Maples was talking, charts and images flashed on the
  screen, and everybody thought he was actually writing on the pen
  tablet as he spoke at the podium. In actuality, he was just waving his
  pencil over blank paper while the videotape ran.

Classic skullduggery from the days of evil Microsoft.

Current reality must be aside to accommodate enough space to dream and imagine future worlds. Our depictions of a future through narrative illusions such as theater, literature, and film are about exploring relationships with a context change.  The act of divergence expressed through the illusion is as if not more important than the content of the divergence.  

In a Proof of Concept, what is a concept and what's being proved?

"Pretotyping is a set of tools, techniques, and tactics designed to help you validate any idea for a new product quickly, objectively, and accurately. The goal is pretotyping is to help you make sure that you are building The Right It before you build It right."

Concept cars
What is a 1.0?

.. [#] PenPoint OS had such novel features as being able to hyperlink any offset of any document (Ted Nelson's Xanadu has this feature by separating the control and data files, the former being byte offsetted) not just through a link, but through actual media that is fully embedded and fully editable (where MSFT's OLE/ActiveX model never quite achieved).  Beyond this, it had a universal, but also contextual gesture system that applied across all applications, you could remove a wall in a CAD drawing with the same gesture that you remove a word in a text document. It is a novel approach that brings the insights of HyperCard to general computer interfaces. There's many more profound features that haven't been replicated. Watching the promotional video "Introducing PenPoint" from 1991 is highly recommended for the curious.
