The reach for possible futures
------------------------------

NIMBYism: The true anti-futurists
=================================

The trade-off between safety and instability works on all dimensions of those words at once

The term NIMBY and its related acronyms indisputably started in 1980 although "the movement" likely started in the 1950s, possibly after the rise of suburbia.  Suburbia gave a contrast to the city in a fundamentally anti-futurist way:

This sentiment can be seen in many places. For instance, Alvin Toffler, in his 1970 work Future Shock (in the chapter deriding this phenomena through the euphemism "Things: The Throw-away Society"), quoted Louis Auchincloss:

  The horror of living in New York is living in a **city without a history** ... All eight of my great-grand-
  parents lived in the city ... and only one of the
  houses they lived in ... is still standing. That’s what
  I mean by the **vanishing past**. (emphasis added)

The NIMBYist foot-dragging espoused by such philosophies aren't against the objects themselves, instead it's the same effect as the March of Intellect detractors, a fear of a possible disruption of the mechanism of relationships among people and their environment, which we call technology. 

The suggestion of potential power disruption merely, in this case, through the sybmolic gesture of changing things, is agressively fought by those who sit upon wobbly thrones. In a 2018 survey of 97 cities, Katherine Einstein found that those who were against housing developments had been in the community on average 5 years longer, were 8 years older, and 97% white. It is those who have enjoyed preferential treatment as a confluence of circumstances, luck, and arrangement who are the most active against a velocity of change because of this interconnectedness.

Most of the complaints of the NIMBYist movement can be seen as a fear of disruption of power through a potential future (since the opposition happens prior to construction, at the point of proposal), and not as some actual experience of disruption. For instance, increased traffic, harm to local business, loss of property value, strain of public resources, disproportional benefit to non-locals, and in increase in crime are all fears of a power dynamic disruption. 

Unlike the Luddites and futurists, the NIMBYs which have been characterized in the UK as BANANAs (Build Absolutely Nothing Anywhere Near Anything) and in the US as CAVE (Citizens Against Virtually Everything) people are for an unearned petty aristocracy incapable of future imaginaries beyond the vagaries of fears. Their forms of absurdity, intention, audacity, and coherency contain a bold vision of stasis.  Their fight for an illusion of perpetuity is in some way, more ambitious than any future oriented thinking; they are trying to stop the inertia of tomorrow.

If they own property, the development will supposedly decrease prices but if they rent, it will supposedly increase prices. It will both increase the lines and busyness of a place while simultaneously putting it out of business. The reason this contradictory nature isn't a problem is because the given reasons aren't real concerns to begin with.  The imagination of change fogs their mind and fundamentally disorients them.

When presented as a continuity and not a fundamental disruption, however, there is no NIMBY response. By making things not appear divergent, this opposition disappears.
