2 Futures Past
==============

2.1 The many ends of history
----------------------------

Perhaps the only thing more inaccurate than a description of a future world is a declaration of its absence. 1.2 and 1.4 showed how interaction of a few ideas with the world helped shape their semantics creating platforms for new ideas to be built on top of them.  

This is the tower model of future building, an iterative creation of strong edifices which sit on top of each other.  Perhaps they are strong, perhaps they are weak. Perhaps it's all an illusion.

Maybe this is the end of history, in our time. Or maybe it's just an end of a history of our time.

2.1.1 Perpetual change in the infinite present
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The inability to participate in either an evolutionary or revolutionary imaginary of the present rests fundamentally on the idea that the world right now is at or near the final stage of existence.  This manifests itself in either one of two ways:

- There will exist a nearly infinite perpetuation of the present dynamics (steady state theory)
    
- We are on the precipous of a major moment of retrograde (collapse theory, apocalypticism)

These exist as frequently as an origin or after-life narrative because of the fundamental insight into what technology is as outlined in 1.1

What is really stated through either belief is an era exhaustion and a proclaimed lack of the imaginary to see possibilities beyond it. It's a disclosure of belief in some linear narrative fulfillment of history.  Both the linear and steady-state theory suffer from the relevance of values that form a lens of interpretation on the past. It's a confinement of the framing and a tampering of dreams.

As will be laid out in 3.5, a stasis of values only assures a coasting into irrelevance.  Whenever someone proclaims an end of history they are actually attesting to an end of their influence upon it. Future happens, with or without the actors of the past. It is their job to continue the orchestration lest they deprecate themselves.

In 1876, the British Post office and Western Union talked about the uselessness of telephones. In 1946, Darryl Zanuck of 20th century Fox claimed television was a fad. 
(https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/pogue-all-time-worst-tech-predictions/)
These technological proclamations are a combination of both ends of history, a perpetuation of the infinite present of one and the collapse of the other. In the Innovator's Dillemma, Christensen repeatedly went over how established players systemically ignored the oncoming storms of disruption because they didn't appreciate the divergence of values in the disruptive technology or its potential to supplant.

The narrative of the infinite present and the apocalyptic future both rely on the narrative of progress fulfilment as opposed to what this text is arguing for; redirection through an opportunistic collaboration of societies facets and an aggressive re-imagining and repurposing of the present to different ends. 

Economic progress, in this sense, is not measured by a freedom to manipulate but instead, a nuance in collaboration. Music doesn't improve by playing it louder and life isn't better when lived faster. A linear increase is not future-oriented; it's about emergent new systems, always. Even in continuous innovation, the emergent systems occur in the 90 part of the 1-9-90 (see 1.3.2). A careful study of economic growth inherently demonstrates this. Economic growth is a measure of the monetization of a society, it's an indication of how much is commodified, transacted, and privatized. It's a deeply self-reinforcing system. 

Sharing a sandwich doesn't "grow the economy" by the GDP sense, only selling it does. The stratification of price and cost with a margin value in between coerced upon the transaction, that's the nuance in collaboration.

The base unit of economic transaction, fiat currency, is issued based on debt and paid back with interest. These debts can only be satisfied if more things are transacted upon, including more aspects of life into the underlying system. Economic growth in this case is about a transformation of the financialization of society. This is why over-financialization is characteristic of a closed geographic frontier of post-industrial capitalism, to keep the growth going we end up colonizing our own lives.

Isn't that, then, an end of history? The end of the 500 year trajectory which started with crown corporations?

A society at its most informative can be found in the stories they tell themselves.  If the story is apocryphal, even better.

Around 1980 a fake quote attributed to a patent office official, supposedly from 1899 began circulating, "Everything that can be Invented has been Invented".  This became popular up to the early 2000s when it started suffering a decline (https://patentlyo.com/patent/2011/01/tracing-the-quote-everything-that-can-be-invented-has-been-invented.html).

2.1.2 Technology: the first 5,000 years
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The second part of this book is about how vanquished visions of tomorrow give birth to new ways of change.

It's a somewhat exhaustive study that spans from the one pre-history to look at every post-history.  It serves to be the evidence for, and examples of the theories outlined thus far (and with some nuances yet to come).

Why would a false proclamation of history's end meet such a trajectory?


Notes
^^^^^
