2.2 Of codex and constitutions
------------------------------

Before machines and before the rise of the modern philosophy of science by Francis Bacon in his 1620 work, Novum Organum, technology still existed.

The technology of agriculture and hunting, food storage and preparation, shelter and violence, the world was awash in the traditionalist definition of tool technology.

Whether it's the ancient Aztec and Chinese calendars, used to predict the seasons or the artifacts of not yet agreed upon use such as the Baghdad battery and Antikythera mechanism, the entire world has been in the quest of technology for time immemorial.

These technology of tools, however, didn't revolutionize society until everything else is in play. 

There are two notable exceptions in the people/process/tools technology that defined the structure of the era:

- the structuring of people and purpose through laws and legal logics

- navigation and communication technology through celestial calendars, arithmatic, measuring devices and the written word

These did not exist as separate tracks but instead as self-referential systems. For instance, 16th century imperialist conquest was made possible only by novel financial instruments, banking institutions, and innovation in property law.

There is debate among paleontologists of when "modern" humans first emerged but it's generally agreed upon that by 200,000 years ago for all intents and purposes we had modern humans.

Then there is a large unknown region until the beginning of the Holocene about 10,000 years ago after which we start getting more and more reliable records.

What happened in the first 95% of the modern human? There's quite a bit of questionable speculation and this is not a book about that.  Instead, it's about why, if these peoples had the ability to create complex language, form cities, and do all the behavorial patterns of the upper paleolithic, did they not do so?

This goes back to the center premise of the work, that all three technological columns had to be orchestrated together into a unitary direction for a societal transformation to occur.

Furthermore, unless there is an independent value of being, any one of the technologies has a limited lifetime.

To answer the question about humanities first 95% percent we can look at what happened at the upper paleolithic and know that such a confluence of interlocking constraints and influences did not simultaneously exist before in order to bootstrap our current notion of civilization.

I say "current notion" because the future is inherently discontinuous and disruptive. There is a heavy tendancy to depict early human timeline along some logical linear progression to some current state. The march of progress combines both the end of history and illusion of continuity fallacies trying to depict the currently held goals as both eternal and finally achieved.

No sir, no delusions of grandeur or haughtiness there.

Instead let's look at history as a past of many goals, many peoples, and many societies.

The present is a consequence of undirected and unsteerable compromise.  Projections of current virtues on antiquity is poetic license to nicely fit history into simplistic logical models.

Industrial revolution, the providence of England
The industrial revolution wasn't possible without a legal system that sent the countryside into the city. The enclosure acts, a number of laws which privatized common land, destroyed the collective and locked out the peasantry from self sustanance. The manual labor of the factory required a lack of feasible livelihood outside of it.

Also, unlike in the United States where slavery existed until the 1860s, the structure of employment has a much greater affordance to the dangers of industrialization. Without an upfront investment of buying humans as property, employee death came at little to no cost.

The US Constitution, as a document, is another piece of technology - originally defining people, processes, and the relationship of physical objects, called property. 

