3 Reign and conquest
--------------------

Technology's companion has always been discovery. Discovery is a controversial word because it implicates relationships that are inherently contextual and usually denies a side of agency. This can be resolved through a polemical distinction. For instance, "In 1492, the native americans and europeans discovered each other" places agency back into both parties. 

Doing this requires a nuance and complexity. A kind of detail that reaps deep rewards.

Discovery's companion word is invention and the process of all of them surround relationships and objects, whether material or not and of assigned agency.

Tomorrows are intrinsically dependent on their ontological mileu. Discoveries for this conversation, which is about imagining and actualizing utilization requires a notion of othernewss. An idea that there is a "there" there which can be manipulated through godmaking acts.

The connection of imperialism, enlightenment, and the scientific revolution coming from the same countries, at the same time constitute what some have called "the age of discovery".

This isn't an apologetics for the brutality of imperialism or some defense of the moral bankruptcy of the actors but it's to analytically see a long arc from the renaissance to the present along the mileu of conquest; control, ownership, and dominance. Often mistaken, often immoral, but also one of the best forms of tomorrow we have.

Projects of ethnonationalism occupied minds as much as the sci-fi fantasies of today.  At the time that they both existed and were culturally acceptable, between about 1860-1940, they were often interconnected in narratives of the future.

To really illustrate how different perspectives were then we can look no further than *Mizora*, a feminist science fiction book from 1880 portraying a future all-female, all-white, self-sufficient society.

As opposed to a materialist perspective on this, which is covered in many texts, this is about understanding how ethnonationalist imperialist projects were about projecting a notion of progress through otherness. 

Although we mostly reject the dynamic today it occupied the imaginary enough o lead to multiple ethnic cleansing programs costing millions of lives. That's a passion and belief in the future far deeper than the next iphone and it extends far beyond any egoist or self-interest theory, beyond Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs, There's no fundamental dispute of property, needs or rights. None of those classical frameworks help us. I think they have very little analytical value and  are mostly incorrect approximations of reality.

Instead, it's the capture of the future imaginary, a vision and promise of a dramatically better future, which motivated people. This is convincing because of the frameworks.

Let's look at homesteading. In 1860, the US offered a reappropriated (from the native americans) 160 acres of land to white europeans who would settle in the US. They had to "improve" the land by converting it into farming and building a house on it over 5 years. In practice this was free land to white people to immigrate to the US, thus pushing aside the native populations. 

It was bloody, disgraceful, violent, and more importantly, completely and utterly worked. This is what they got right:

absurdity, intention, audacity, and coherency

absurdity: most people were living on about 0.1 acres. The idea of having over 1,000 times more, for free? that's the highest absurdity

intention: the instructions were clear and the purpose given was deeply seated in racist nation building. if you were of fair skin, you were wanted to follow a set of exact instructions to help build the country.

audacity: this means moving to effectively the middle of nowhere, in some place you've never been, by boat. The Atlantic crossing was about a 10 day journey and the recently constructed railroads meant you could potentially be on the new land in under 3 weeks. A completely new way of living, 3 weeks way.

coherency: there's a single, clear, direct call to action, a simple achievable goal. this offer is understandable

people, process, tools

people: not by activity but by race, which at this time was seen as a valid equivalent. Given widely believed racial hierarchies, there was thought to be a natural applied superiority of white people in order to build a better country. Sure, this belief self-reinforced and gave different levels of opportunity which fed back on itself, sure ... but the trickiest bit about self-reinforcing systems is their mechanics sustains the illusion.

process: In this case it's the homesteading act itself which facilitates a framework of thinking of "nature" versus "not nature" and the transformative process between the two through managing the crops. This distinction appears all throughout our language. Weeds are nature creeping into our not-nature constructions, ruining our illusion of a distinction.  Indiginosu people, at the time referred to as "savages" and being depicted as of the nature, were things which did not belong in the "not nature" homesteading

tools: To understand the tools, we have to look at the long view. The peak year of homesteading was 1913. 10 years into the homestead act, the number of acres per year was 8% of its peak.  There wasn't a climb until the mid 1880s when the railroad system was built out. Even though the offer and people were around, it wasn't until the tools (support systems) existed to make it feasibly achievable for the non max-maxes of the world that it really took off.

1-9-90: The 90% here, the dream of leaving the soot laden industrial cities for your own house on the prarie was the strong narrative. The execution was rather murky but the narrative was strong enough so that it didn't matter. The idea of escape was there, that's important, but that was the easy part.

And there you have it. This is how the "unorganized terrotories" of the west eventually ethnically cleansed the natives, destroyed the praries, converted it to farms, and then later consolidated it into the agrobusiness we have now.  Ethical? Probably not. Conquest usually isn't.  But did it work? absolutely.
