2.5 Radio, television, and the internet
-------------------------------------

In understanding how the technology of newspapers came together in the 19th century we can use the model on each successive medium of the 20th century.

The transitional technologies [#]_ which moved the theater of narrative from the written page to the pocket video player followed the same communication wave as newspapers as the new stepwise plateaus became available via their PPT requirements.

Each successive tool (except for one), from introduction had an

 * increased potential reach of the message 
   
 * increased speed of transmission

 * decreased labor and capital to prouce 

 * decreased time to deployment

Possible horizons are both constrained by the action and the imaginary and the material realities and their power dynamics of control surrounding them.  Some punditry claims that solely individual attitude and action can change society and some punditry says that it's the structure of ownership and power with individual action an illusion.

Hopefully the historical analysis up to this point has shown how both a structuring of possibility and a structuring of action are needed before the trajectories diverge to constitute future steps.

The next technology we are going to look at is Hertzian waves, so named after experimental physicist Heinrich Hertz. By the early 1900s, the technology of wave transmission was suggested for Wireless Telegraphs and Wireless Telephones.  It was used by ships to send messages at sea.  The separation of the frequency spectrem into channels and the commercialization of these "radio" devices was done by Marconi, 

In the 1910s radio transmitters and receivers came in kits and became a hobby of tinkerers, much like the first microcomputers in the 1970s. These "amateur radio license" were at the time just "radio license". In 1917 there were 13,581 licenses for people to transmit radio. It was mostly just telegraphs and some grainy voice (the boom for recorded music was still 10 years off).

By 1919, Frank Conrad, who worked for Westinghouse started broadcasting music and it led to Westinghouse starting a radio station.  Newspapers followed, starting their own local stations. It created a boom in the purchase of radios, which Westinghouse was more than happy to manufacture.

In the same way that newspapers were only useful if people could read them, radio broadcasts were only meaningful if people could receive them.


=========== ============  ==========  ==========  ========
Technology  Start of Use  Mainstream  Disruption  2nd wave
=========== ============  ==========  ==========  ========
Newspaper   1600          1820        1840        1960
Radio       1900          1920        1930        1960
Television  1920          1950        1960        2010
Internet    1960          1990        2010        not yet
Cell phones 1980          1990        2010        not yet
=========== ============  ==========  ==========  ========

Online 
1. Radio
2. Television
3. Cell phones
4. Online services and the internet
Radio, casettes
Xerox machine, 60s protest, zines
print, bernays propaganda
television, rothchilds stock manipulation
the internet, arab spring
Frankestien, The Steam Man of the Prairies, RUR 
extraction is just rearrangement
Fdr was the radio president. Jfk was the television president. Trump is the internet president


The screen constructs a soul, robbing realities of narrative agency

For a generation of americans, if you captured television you captured their consciousness.


Open source software requires cheap internet, cathedral and Bazaar, p 51

.. [#] Some authors separate continuous versus discontinuous innovation. Moore (Crossing the Chasm) and Christensen (Innovator's Dilemma) describe how different mechanics are in play for two classes of product introductions.  This ultimately is a producer-side analysis.  Consumer-side discontinuity is not always in tandem with producer side. For instance, non-technical consumers likely have zero realization of the transition from mechanical magnetic platter-based storage to solid state chip based storage even though this is the most significant leap in computer storage since the first hard drive shipped in 1956. For the world writ large, there needs to be discontinuity in the "90" part of the 1-9-90 rule for a perceptual discontinuity outside the "inside baseball" of the industry. Even then, there isn't a single dimension of appraisal. Some dimensions have continuity while others have breaks and redirections. The lynchpins of continuous dimensions are the core function of coherency in the AICA model. 
