2.6 A Tale of Two Governments
-----------------------------

Up to this point, the structure of the government hasn't really been discussed.

Not only is government ensured with defining the possibilities of society, it also defines the rights of its people, what is defended and manages the creation of the currency and terms of the economy.

Analyzing the super structure of governing bodies is critical in understanding how possibilities are defined. Our cultural narratives and the histories we tell ourselves also inform the structures we choose to bind ourselves by.

Let's look at two 40 year periods, 1930-1970 and 1970-2010. A dramatic number of tools and firsts happened in the era:

- 1930 - 1970: World War 2, the United Nations, the Atomic Bomb, the Computer, Moon landing,
- 1970 - 2010: Personal computer, mobile phone, internet, Vietnam war, cimate change decline of smoking

1930 - 1970 is tied together by a cultural belief that there is a society, a collective governing force that can be empowered, orchestrated, and directed.  

1970 - 2010 is tied together by a cultural belief that there isn't a society, there is no collective governing force, it cannot be orchestrated or directed so don't empower it.

Civil rights and the Vietnam War was a pivotal moment in the mistrust of the process of a representative collective acting on behalf of public beneficence. The former showed state actors repressing mass protests for equal access to democratic institutions. The latter was government instrumentation of wars seen as unnecessary. 

These two fundamental violations of trust laid fertile ground for a new, individualist, private market based perspective of society which badgers the government, extracting profits and socializing losses.

It became a battle of visions of democracy. One form, fell victim to a crisis of representation through democracy while the other got injected by a democratization of representation.

The Chicago school sees government as inept, corrupt, dysfunctional systems to fleece the tax payer and so the programs under their guidances work within this constraint on reality

This radical pivot changed the perimeter of the possible. The devolving of the collective to the individual, may to socialists appear as some devious treachery by the ruling class, however, this perhaps ill-place and inccorect notion of rugged individualism is a result of the democratization of the means due to the commodification of the media.

The individual, imagined as the producer, consumer, and entire system of marxian economic reproduction led to a shaping of the historical narrative to be rugged individuals, devoid of context, using pure grit to be successful. The stories we tell ourselves shape our notions of possible futures.

When faced with cognitive dissonance, people either change their mind or change reality.

2.6.2 The once future city
==========================

The geography of future building not only appears to exist but also appears to move. Many cities are trying to Silicon Valley themselves through subsidization and development projects.

It's not about what governments do, it's about what people think they are.  They are, as established in 2.2, a technology. The relationship of the citizenry with the power structure directs the confinement of innovation.

This isn't just in the fancy tech world, but it's also in the world of food riots, overthrowing government, devolvement into civil wars, a rebuilding after a destruction, these are also future acts.

The collective imagination governs and builds the society in these instances.  Together they act as a government.

Detroit versus silicon valley

Section 2 Closing
=================

To understand the future we must understand the past. Then to build the future we must ignore the past and have new pre-semantic ideas about the futures we want to build. We need to avail ourselves to the current state of reality and collect it together to orchestrate trajectories into new emergent categories. 

The next section will go over the properties of this emergent chaos more generally and how to gain an awareness of the direction of flow in its dynamics.

Notes
*****
