3 What is a game?
-----------------

The second company, the gaming one, is just me and one other person. We released one game that didn't totally fail, but we were able to use as a learning platform (which was the objective) in order to find out how to construct something people would play.

Games that have staying power and have been cloned dozens of times usually can be broken up into a madlibs form: "It's a ______ (gerund) game". They usually have somewhere between 1-3 of these gerunds.  Let me give you an example: "It's a running game", "It's a jumping game", "It's a running and jumping game". Lightgun arcade games are "aiming and shooting", Tetris is "packing and organizing" etc.

Using this framework opens up many possibilities to games which have yet to exist or which may already exist but aren't seen as a game. For instance, what would a "voting" video game look like? That's called reddit, it totally already exists - even has a point system and leaderboard. 

After going through a list of gerunds today, and trying to play on the absurdity thesis, here's a few subversive we came up with:

**A smoking game**

You are a chain smoker trying not to get caught. The player needs to constantly tap the phone in order to *not* smoke or swipe for a direction of movement to make the character hide from the judgemental public.  

When the character needs to discard a cigarette butt, the player has to wait for nobody to look, and toss them recklessly in the street. Judgemental characters include people such as pregnant women, police officers, traffic cops, and others.  

The objective is to get through the most cigarettes possible without getting caught.  People may also ask you for a cigarette, in which case you can give one away, giving you more points, but only if you occasionally engage with the public instead of always trying to run away from them.

*More subversive*: Your character is actually going through EMT, then nursing, then medical school. As you successfully go through packs of cigarettes without getting caught you can eventually get promoted to head surgeon. 
 
**A parking game**

You work for a valet service and are constantly given cars which all drive very differently. You are tasked with doing things like parallel parking, or backing in very difficult positions all the while random obstacles like babies and cats come out from nowhere. You are free to hit them for a penalty, but then they stick to the car tire and effect the handling. You need to quickly remove the squished obstacles from the tire before people notice. You then need to discard them, much like the smoking game. 

Everything is on a timer. If you ding a car, you may lose if the driver notices. If you get back too late, you will get penalized for taking too long. The better you do, the more tips you get. You need to make some threshold of tips in order to progress to the next level, which will be parking with more obstacles.

*More subversive*: There are other drivers whose quality of driving is entirely determined by just sheer sexism and racism, mostly. Women would drive worse than men, about say, 80% of the time. Asians and old people would equally drive terribly in different ways - but may also, occasionally be be just fine.  The worst driver, however, will be a white guy in a business suit driving a white BMW. Those people will always be terrible because everyone knows they're the worst.
 
**A fucking game**

You are the town's rasputin, the go to person for infidelity and have missions that include things like sneaking into windows of people who are married or have roommates and then either quickly or quietly doing your business (no explicit sex need be shown, I'm thinking retro graphics). There is always a risk that someone may walk in on you or you'll be discovered some way. As the game progresses you become like the singer in the 1989 video for "Yo No Me Llamo Javier" (My name isn't Javier) by the spanish group Low Tereros Meurtos where a cassanova continues to run into his former lovers, who have children from him, and tries to claim he's someone else. It's effectively a rogue game, where you have to have a balanced strategy in order to progres.
  
**A masturbating game**

You are a poindexter middle school boy with aspirations to go to an Ivy League school. However you are constantly bombarded with sexual urges and you must find discrete ways to relieve yourself - such as behind bushes, under bleachers, inside public bathrooms, etc. Certain places get defined as safe spaces with various risk profiles.

This would have the art and feel of the classic SNES "Zombies ate my neighbors". The character has to frequently perform well on tests and exams and can only do so if he can focus. 

However as he is given missions to say "study at the library", he ends up passing scenes with things like of waterfighting, beach volleyball, aerobics at the park, and other mildly suggestive things. He must find seclusion to quickly masturbate so he can get back to his studies. The character has a known number of days between exams and must get in a certain level of "quality" studying time.  Winning the game is when the character doesn't get caught and gets a straight A+ report card. 

*More subversive*: Your character has no concern for the gender or age of the people he is aroused by and responds equally to them all.  The senior citizen doing calesthetics workout is the same trigger as anything else. The verbaige in the game is also sophomoric and inappropriate, with phrases like "warning: maximum horny, stroke the sausage!" aided by sounds of sirens. As the horniness meter increases, the character moves slower and in anguish as if injured.

If the player ignores the instructions and say, the character goes and takes a test when too horny, he'll get an erection during the exam (depicted by the shock of the fellow students in the classroom), sent to the principle's office, and fail.
  
If any of these games existed and got the mechanics right, the absurdity and presentation thesis, if right, would lead to them being runaway successes. There's information about how to handle that through consciously crafting intentionality in the next chapter.

Going back to the study of business premises however, this isn't outside the teachings of say "BHAG" (Big hairy audacious goals - See Jim Collins books), a clear and compelling goal that makes you feel uncomfortable that looks like it shouldn't and couldn't be achieved. 

There's another premise which drives this, the idea of a "magic service which feels like it should be illegal". These come around every couple years and is one of the biggest indicators of success. Many things could be described like this: Airbnb, Uber, Napster, YouTube (for music, round 2), Myspace (for internet stalking) and Instagram (for internet stalking, round 2). 

To understand why using the exercise helps get to new ideas we can take the last example and transform it into a novel game. Here's how it works:

 * Perhaps euphemisms would be an appropriate way to execute this
 * Euphemisms give way to allegories. Perhaps using allegorical representations would work
 * What is the character had a "pet" that constantly followed him around and is need of constant attention. 

And now we're genuinely in a different, new, and novel space.  Repurposing the outlandish mechanics to an attention seeking pet that must be constantly satiated gets halfway to the mechanics and opens up a whole new range of possibilities.

Instead of sexual stimulation, it could be say, a dog, that constantly needs to be "walked" - that's the other half of the same mechanics. Now we could have 2 dogs perhaps, or task different kinds of dogs. There can be a wider range of consequences and a richer form of interactivity since the taboos don't need to be walked around.

However, the important thing to see here is that unless we venture into the forbidden and absurd, these roads do not get taken.  For instance, the joke is that in the 90s you were told never to get into cars with strangers and don't talk to people over the internet. Now with Uber, you get into cars of strangers you met over the internet. What a ludicrous idea. 

The whole class sounds equally proposterous. With Turo you loan your car out to strangers. With AirBnb, you welcome strangers into your house, give them a set of keys, and tell them to have a great time, then you leave. What on earth? This is crazy. But it also works.

Silicon Valley even has a term for these now, they call them "pirate companies" ones where technology exploits the fact that it's ahead of the law and gets to scale quickly enough to fend off being legislated illegal by offering a compelling utility function. Sure, that's a fine description from a classical marketing analysis. 

But instead, I'd like to present it as not getting ahead of law, but instead getting ahead of demand and culture (more information on how culture, property, and technology are interconnected in chapter 5), and the most essential analysis here is these classes of companies are "getting away with magic".

The notion of magic, as used here, is closest to that of a closeup magician where you are watching them perform a trick and become completely shocked and dumbfounded that something just happened. The magic of Twitter, for instance, is when anyone could potentially have a public conversation with a celebrity. You could talk directly to a president just with a few keystrokes. That's magic. A game where you control a middle school boy's sexual urges, that's a "WTF" moment that the internet is all about. When you make exist subversion on the ceremonial level without any underlying substantive content, you can usually get away with it.

So here's what we have:

  * Do not be constrained by barriers of practicality. Absurdity should be embraced. (ch1)
  * Success is 90% presentation, 9% execution, and 1% idea. (ch2)
  * The product or service should feel like a kind of magic which ought to be illegal. (ch2)
