3.4 Of risk and revolution
--------------------------

  The history of human thought recalls the swinging of a pendulum which takes **centuries to swing**. After a long period of slumber comes a moment of awakening. Then thought frees herself from the chains with which those interested — rulers, lawyers, clerics — have carefully enwound her.

  She shatters the chains. She subjects to severe criticism all that has been taught her, and lays bare the emptiness of the religious political, legal, and social prejudices amid which she has vegetated. **She starts research in new paths, enriches our knowledge with new discoveries, creates new sciences.**

  But the inveterate enemies of thought — the government, the lawgiver, and the priest — soon recover from their defeat. By degrees they gather together their scattered forces, and remodel their faith and their code of laws to adapt them to the new needs. 

  Petr Kropotkin, Anarchist Morality, 1890

Using the theory and framework is descriptive and not perscriptive. As a course and ex-post factor analysis, from a historial lens is readily constructible however this does not mean that purposefully exercising the system is an effective strategy.

We went over many examples of how the mechanics of the framework can be layered upon successes.

An intellectual honesty requires two things and a functional design requires two more.

First we have to try, as rigorously and with as much effort as possible, to layer the frameworks on failures without the preconception of their correctness in order to validate them. [#]_

Ultimately whether a future has been actualized and a whole technology has been instrumented must be falsifiable. [#]_

Because technology and futures are ultimately abstract, quantifying them encloses them.

is whether the creation of opportunistic windowing or an exploitation of them using the frameworks will likely lead to a better outcome.

It's an expensive proposition and a large upfront investment. As the manuscript was being prepared I started looking for good test cases to proactively test the hypothesis and modify (or even abandon) the text if necessary.

As seen in 1.3, modern art satisfies the system and creates isolated small futures, as does, arguably screen media and articles. The following text is a document of a social experiment of intentionally creating through the frameworks as a means of hypothesis testing.  I'll have to have separate executions without some of the aspects to see if there's much of an effect.

Human reaction and condition isn't replicable unless on a fairly large, statistically significant scale. These are hard, long, and expensive trials to do and even then not necesarily supportive of any more resilient statement other than perhaps "indeterminate". 

Embrace failure. There's nothing more liberating than being freed from the social obligations of success.
riches come of faith and foolery

We touched upon "reach distance" briefly in 1.4. It'd be important to define it now that we have more context:

  Reach distance: The distance (number of permutations of current reality) to a particular innovation is a consequence of current context.

Or less technically, "an idea whose time has come". There have been numerous times where multiple groups, without any communication with each other, separate incentives and funding sources, came upon nearly identical inventions at about the same time. [#]_


Unaccusative verb

Notes
*****

.. [#] The difference between science, opinion, faith, truth, and fact have been fogged probably since the beginning and many authors have dealt with 
   the question. For the purposes of the text, science and faith are processes of truth. Facts are ultimately faith based because it's in the service of disclosing a reality without a process of confirming it.
.. [#] There's a problem of induction in any theory. Generalizations are made based on limited observations and falling victim to Humes Uniformity of Nature, which not only presupposes the future will be like the past but also the description of dynamics is that of a true mechanism.
.. [#] Exclusive monopoly rights for the first the patent office is rather indefensible unless you think the world should be some giant unfair game of lopsided allocation where indiscriminate absolute monopolistic power is given based on mere chance.  Truly if some inventions were inevitable and many independent groups effectively thought of the same thing because it was obvious given the time, then anyone should be able to make money from it, not just some swift footed person bee-lining to the patent office so they can crush the other inventors in the courts.
