3.5 The many worlds of tomorrow
-------------------------------

On my bookshelf I have a number of futurist works I collected from writing this manuscript. 
As a culture we have lost our hope in the future. The magnificent visions of the future that populated the bookshelves since
about 1860 have turned dark and hopeless. It has become far easier to imagine a future of smouldering ruin then of a wonderous future.

In 1983, Omni magazine published a future almanac, comitting 300 pages to concrete future predictions.

By 2020, we were *supposed* to have 2,000 people living in space, fusion reactors, asteroid mining, and be in anticipation of a new ice age. Also in this book the Soviet Union still exists.

Also notable firsts that did happen, such as the first black president, expansion of gay rights, that most reading would happen over computer screens instead of books, this missed them.

I've often wondered what historians will say about our time in a few thousand years.  Will, much like with ancient rome, the century that we're in now, be called, say "The crisis of the 21st century - the great fall" and then depict say, the enlightenment of the 18th century as the high point of civilization, followed by the slow decline that we are in?

If the future is around us and not evenly distributed, that future to be distributed to us could as much be the homeless encampment as the driverless electric car. Are we amidst a slow creep of collapse? Is it reversible? Is it necessarily a bad thing?

One could argue that during the dark ages perhaps people relied on strong communities instead of strong authorities. Perhaps it was a far more pleasant life to be without a king or the project of a political state, without private property or a political impetus to yield a divisiveness among humanity. The value of a tomorrow must not be judged by the context of today.

But we live in a mileu. That's why trajectories, even discontinuous ones, are always easier to predict as the future when compared to the self-referential adaptive mechanisms that actually permute the present and present it as the future.

Because the technological interlocutors have a chaotic dynamic (there's a sensitivity to initial conditions, there's a deep amount of mixing and a periodic power assymetry), at first glance it looks like the achievability of a future is a metric of their "distance" from the present.  

This distance is not always a challenge. As Lenin, from the Soviet Union said, "There are decades when nothing happens; and there are weeks when decades happen." or to use the title of a book by Alexei Yurchak about the final years of the Soviet Union "Everything was forever until it was no more". Distances here are perceptive based on initial conditions. When the conditions change, the topology of the system mixes differently and the machine cycles in new ways.

In that way, the Soviet collapse was both obvious and unexpected.  Like a friend who trades stock once told me "The market is going to crash some day soon, but probably not tomorrow."

Even though there is a fundamental dynamic of the system that makes it inpenetrable it's the same one that makes it coherently predictable.  This same friend tells me he can draw the future price of any stock on a graph so long as he isn't required to label the axis. The timing of the inevitable is part of the initial condition to the subsequent permutation of the future and determines the affordances to opportunities.

Preparation is for that which cannot be controlled. Adaptation is for that which cannot be prepared. Death is for that which cannot be adapted.

This book has about taking the potential of future-thought, grabbing it by the horns, and riding it. The closing section is about recognizing that the future is always happening upon us and unless we can calibrate our thoughts to the new initial conditions, we will not have the means of persuading the trajectory.

Fredom from materiality through materiality. Fantasies of liberation from nature. Manchester is only posible through mississippi.
The narrative world of future stuffs.

In the introduction I talked about the collective imaginary future portrayed by science fiction. With enough background now we can generalize the narrative.

Science fiction can be seen as an illusion of context for a different forward facing iteration of a PPT model of technology with a AICA goal interacting within a contemporary context.  The 1950s depiction of space travel with stepford wives, the interwar serials of a future with a tentative peace, 1800s depiction of racially pure futures, the 1970s and 80s depiction of cultural collapse without any replacement, these should be fairly direct to apply to the previous discussions.


Notes
*****
