3.6 Climate Change Change
-------------------------

The core question that climate change will offer an answer to is whether avoiding a catastrophe is enough to lead to meaningful change.

todo: negative versus positive futures

The evidence of the text points to the answer being a resounding "no".  The necessity in avoiding catastrophe is an insufficient impetus for systemic change.  

The threat of nuclear war is a great example. We continued business as usual and are 65 years into mere minutes to Doomsday. 

We should have gone to nuclear war. Multiple times. 

However, each time, the human who was entrusted to take the action of launching the missiles acted defiantly, disobeying military order and declined to do so. In all of these instances, either miscommunication or malfunction led to a false conclusion that an attack was underway and it was up to some person to do a counter-attack.  Each time, they chose not to as their commitment to humanity exceeded their commitment to country. 

This is despite the fact that there were muliple opportunities to initiate a counterattack to a phantom system.  Nobody was willing to take the responsibility of making the final human decision.  The tools said yes, the process said yes but the people still said no. Two of the three pillars is insufficient for the divergence.

Despite these multiple close calls, we as a society decide to keep all the three pillars actuated, we're ready for an end of the world to happen in a few minutes.

The core takeaway is nobody is willing to start a change where there are decisive actions with known disaster narratives.

But what about where there isn't?  There's many collapses which actually happened that this text hasn't addressed such as the Crisis of the 3rd century (collapse of Rome), Bronze age collapse, the Plague and mini-ice age, the many island nation collpases and a number of ancient civilizations such as the Olmec, Aztech, and Mauri.

How can we avoid the fate that has befell so many similarly situated civilizations which came before us?

Do we have the PPT to get past climate change?

As batteries become more effecient, products consume less of it, and observations like Swanson's curve make technologies such as solar more reasonable, it looks like we could be approaching an apex event like what happened with newspapers, radio, internet, and television. Or, this could be a 2nd wave structure.

However, historically the increase in transmission and consumption effeciency has led to an overall increase in use and has never historically served as a guarantor of aggregate consumptive decrease.

If we are to follow the predecessor patterns and apply them to climate change and if we are going to call this a 2nd wave of power generation, this means that production needs to be democratized like in communications.  Standards would need to arise of a way to have a distributd network to flow demand from supply and a way for innovative power generation systems to tap into this network.

A 2nd wave of power generation like a 2nd wave of publishing, radio, and television, would fundamentally redefine the possible and give rise to new institutions.

Don't forget to negotiate with hope. It's always up for making a deal.

Such whole technologies as a societal platform serve as a framework springboarding new possibilities that were otherwise unattainable.

These can manifest as private and commercial but not necessarily. As  the in the 1930-1970 era discussed in 2.6, system can be developed based on a need and for the benefit of progress. We do not always need to allocate resources and attention based on profit potential.  It is a choice to continue to respect this arbitrary set of rules.

We could also decide to use a different dimension of value, perhaps avoiding societal collapse, to be the rules upon how we allocate.  There does not have to be a social justice, leftist, or democratic ethos to substitute profit. Simply trying to avoid the death of humanity (through say crop failures due to a lack of tropical glaciation) ought be sufficient.

These axioms of choice of our future, the processes we choose to employ, the skills we choose to develop, are ours to decide.

We do know by now, however, that tools are partial technologies. Geo-engineering or nuclear fusion is as much a solution as if we claimed merely recycling and going vegan is a solution or merely electing green parties is a solution. They all *must work together*. Reliance on the saving grace of machines makes us like Hitler desperately sending off his secret V-2 rockets to the British shores, late in the war, expecting science to redeem his failed society.

Section 3 Closing
=================

The precipous of revolution and collapse of times look nearly indistinguishale because they are both times of desperation where divergence is welcome. Their only difference is in outcome. Embracing imminent failure is emboldens actions without reservation.

 Our potential of future actualization without mechanizing the engine of tomorrow-building through the PPT interplay has shown to be the key element in the dreams that never came.

Similarly, anything short of shockingly unrealistic, focused intentional dreams only sow the seeds of usurpation by others with visions who sprint ahead of progress.  Temperate rationality has never sustained the change it sought.

Be bold, be absurd, be stupid and impractically optimistic. Know where you are going and institute the engines of future-making to get there. Be reckless with dreams, careful with actions, divergent in thought, unified in process, innovative in idea and integral in execution.

Tomorrow is achievable when we know how to reach for it. We are the generation tasked with the challenge of building the 21st century of our grandparents dreams and our grandchildrens future, let's get to work.

Notes
*****
